---
title: "Evaluating the effectiveness and quality of mobile applications for perinatal depression and anxiety: A systematic review and meta-analysis"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-10-10
excerpt: "Our objectives were to assess: (1) the effectiveness of existing mHealth apps for reducing symptoms of maternal depression and/or anxiety during the prenatal period and/or the first year postpartum, and (2) the app quality of commercially available apps targeting perinatal depression and/or anxiety."
date: 2021-10-10
venue: "Journal of Affective Disorders"
paperurl: "https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S016503272101065X"
---

Background
Our objectives were to assess: (1) the effectiveness of existing mHealth apps for reducing symptoms of maternal depression and/or anxiety during the prenatal period and/or the first year postpartum, and (2) the app quality of commercially available apps targeting perinatal depression and/or anxiety.

Methods
To address Objective 1, we searched five electronic databases (MEDLINE, CINAHL, PsycINFO, Web of Science, and Embase) from their inception until May 3rd, 2021. For the second objective, we searched Google Play and Apple App Stores in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, and Australia until May 3rd, 2021.

Results
Our search identified 3,897 articles, seven of which were meta-analyzed. mHealth apps did not improve perinatal depression (SMD, -0.39; 95% CI, -0.80 to 0.03) or anxiety (SMD, 0.01; 95% CI, -0.13 to 0.16) within the first 3 months post-intervention or at 6 months post-intervention. Our search of app stores identified 74 commercially available apps, 37 of which were evaluated via MARS tool. Current apps for perinatal anxiety and/or depression were rated to be of moderate quality on the MARS (mean, 3.6/5).

Limitations
There is a small number of overall studies in this field and the individual studies have methodological limitations. Furthermore, few apps identified in our app store search have been clinically tested.

Conclusion
Despite their widespread availability, mHealth apps do not appear to effectively reduce perinatal depression or anxiety, and few were subjectively rated to be of high quality. There is a need to develop higher quality mHealth apps and assess their potential to improve perinatal maternal mental health.

[Download paper here](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S016503272101065X)

Recommended citation: Zoe Tsai, Adam Kiss, Shaheer Nadeem, Karen Sidhom, Sawayra Owais, Mateusz Faltyn, Ryan J Van Lieshout,
Evaluating the effectiveness and quality of mobile applications for perinatal depression and anxiety: A systematic review and meta-analysis, Journal of Affective Disorders, Volume 296, 2022, Pages 443-453, ISSN 0165-0327, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2021.09.106.
